---
layout: post
title: "Seminar 5 – Universal and Existential Quantifiers"
date: 2026-03-24
---

## Summary
During this seminar, we looked deeper into universal and existential quantifiers. 

### Understanding the quantifiers 
Let $P$ be a property for variables of type $T$.
Statements like $\exists x : P x$ involving the **existential quantifier** are equivalent to a pair $\langle x, h\rangle$, short for 
```lean
x : T
h : P x
```

Statements like $\forall x : P x$ involving the **universal quantifier** can be seen as a function, mapping $x$ to a prove for $P x$. This is why we can (often? always?) deal with universal quantifiers in the same way that we deal with implications. 

### Getting rid of quantifiers: decision table
<table> 
  <tr>
    <th></th>
    <th>in goal ($\vdash ...$)</th>
    <th>in hypothesis ($h : ...$)</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>universal: $\forall x : P x$</td>
    <td>intro x</td>
    <td>specialize h x<br>apply h<br> exact h x</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>existential: $\exists x : P x$</td>
    <td>use x<br>exact ⟨x, hx⟩</td>
    <td>rcases h with ⟨x, hx⟩<br>obtain ⟨x, hx⟩ := h</td>
  </tr>
</table>

### The new tactics
The **intro** tactics introduces a new hypothesis, shortening the goal. We have already seen this tactic in the context for implication.
Suppose that your goal is 
```lean
⊢ ∀ x : P x
```
Then, if we run
```lean
intro y
```
we get
```lean
y : T
⊢ P y
```

The **specialize** tactic can be used to get rid of hypotheses involving existential quantifiers. Consider the following context: 
```lean
y : T
h : ∀ (x : T) : P x
```
Then, running 
```lean
specialize h y
```
changes the context to
```lean
y : T
h : P y
```

Similarly, if we have 
```lean
x : T
h : ∀ (x : T) : P x
⊢ P x
```
we can run 
```lean
apply h
```
or 
```lean
exact h x
```
to solve the goal.

For existential quantifiers in the goal, we have the **use** tactic. 
Consider 
```lean
⊢ ∃ x : P x
```
Then, running 
```lean
use 42
```
turns the goal into 
```lean
42 : T
⊢ P 42
```
If we see the existential quantifier as a pair of a term of type $T$ and a proof for this term satisfying $T$, then the use tactic introduces this term, and changes the goal to specifying the proof. 

if we have the context and goal
```lean
x : T
h : P x
⊢ ∃ x : P x
```
then we can also solve it with 
```lean
exact ⟨x, h⟩
```

Lastly, the **rcases** tactic lets us rewrite a context like: 
```lean
h : ∃ x : P x
```
By running 
```lean
rcases h with ⟨x, hx⟩
```
we change the context to 
```lean
x : T
hx : P x
```
Alternatively, the **obtain** tactic combines **have** and **rcases**. We can achieve the same change of context with 
```lean
obtain ⟨x, hx⟩ := h
```

### Section 3.3: Negation
(update will follow)

### Section 3.4: Conjuction and iff
(update will follow)

### Section 3.5: Disjunction
(update will follow)


## Next week
Lean is entirely built on dependent type theory. Therefore, we invited Malvin Gattinger next week to give an **introduction to type theory**. 
Be there to uncover the foundations of what we have been working on the past weeks. 

As homework, try to finish chapter 3 on logic up till 3.5. We will skip 3.6, and continue with chapter 4 afterwards (skip 4.3 as well if you want). 

