---
layout: post
title: "Seminar 1 – Introduction"
date: 2026-02-24
---

## Summary
We worked on exercises 2.3-2.5 today, where the most important new tactic is **apply**.

### Apply and implication, backward reasoning
We can use the apply tactic to prove our goals with backwards reasoning. For example, suppose that you have the following in your Lean InfoView:
```lean
h1: A → B
⊢ B
```
then, the line
```lean
apply h1
```
results in
```lean
h1: A → B
⊢ A
```
If we can prove $A$, then we know by h1 that we have a proof for $B$, too.

We often have theorems that consist of multiple implications. For example, suppose that your Lean InfoView looks like
```lean
h1: A → B → C
⊢ C
```
Note that $A \to B \to C$ has implicit brackets, and is short for $A \to (B \to C)$. The line 
```lean
apply h1
```
result in two goals:
```lean
h1: A → B → C
⊢ A
⊢ B
```
Note that if we can show that $A \land B$ is true, we know that $C$ is true by h1. 
to prove $A$ and $B$ separately, you can type \. at the start of each case, which will be replaced by ·. 
If $A$ and $B$ have the same proof, you can also type <;> and provide the simultaneous proof afterwards.

### Apply and implication, forward reasoning
We can also use apply to rewrite a hypothesis. Consider an InfoView stating
```lean
h1: A → B
h2: A
⊢ whatever
```
then, we can think as h2 as a proof for $A$, and of $h1$ as an object that maps any proof for $A$ to a proof for $B$. 
if we run
```lean
apply h1 at h2
```
the InfoView changes to
```lean
h1: A → B
h2: B
⊢ whatever
```

### Constructor for logic and
Another useful tactic is **constructor**. Consider the following InfoView:
```lean
⊢ A ∧ B
```
the tactic **constructor** will split this goal up into proving $A$ and $B$ separately. 

## For next week
As a homework for the next time, try to finish section 2 (Basics) entirely. If you run into any problems, we can solve them together at the start of the next seminar. 
