---
layout: post
title: "Seminar 9 – Discrete Mathematics"
date: 2026-04-21
---

### Lists
The first exercises involve lists. Let `α : Type*` be any type. Then the new type `List α` has terms that are lists with elements of type `α`.
This list type is defined inductively using two constructors. The first one is `List.nil`, also denoted as `[]`. It can be considered the empty list. The second one is `List.cons`, also denoted as `::`.
The following table summarize what the types of these constructor terms.
<table><thead>
  <tr>
    <th>Constructor term</th>
    <th>Type</th>
  </tr></thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td class="code">List.nil<br>[]</td>
    <td class="code">List α</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="code">List.cons<br>::</td>
    <td class="code">α → List α → List α</td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

The inductive definition of lists says that every term of type `List α` is either `[]` or `a :: as`, with `a : α` and `as : List α`.
For example, if we have `a, b: α`, then `[]` is a term of type `List α` by the inductive construction. Also, `b :: []` is a type of `List α`, because it has the form `b :: as` with `as = []` a term of `List α`. Continuing this pattern, we see that `a :: b :: []` is a term of `List α`.
Note that we can use short hand notation `[a, b] = a :: b :: []`.

For proving theorems about list, the tactic `induction'` will be helpful. For a list `as`, we can handle the two different cases (`as = []` and `as = a::tail`) separately as
```lean
induction' a with a tail ih
· -- give the proof when as = []
· -- give the proof when as = a::tail, with ih the induction hypothesis (the theorem applied to tail)
```

### Binary trees
Similarly to lists, the inductive type BinTree also has two possible formats. The first one is `empty`, which is just an empty binary tree. The second format is `node l r`, where `node` is of type `BinTree → BinTree → BinTree`. 
Hence, the function `node` creates a new binary tree by connecting a left tree (the first argument) and a right tree (the second argument) together at a new node. We can again use the `induction'` tactic for proofs about binary trees. For example, if we want to prove theorem about a binary tree `t`, then we can use
```lean
induction' t with l r hl hr
· -- give the proof when t = empty
· -- give the proof when t = node l r, with hl a proof that the theorem holds for l and hr a proof the the theorem holds for r.
```


## Next week
Next week, we will finish chapter 6 (discrete mathematics) and start with chapter 7 (structures).
